Title: Designing by Sense of Feel
Time: 1419506228


I make videos on the mathematics of video game development. Recently someone asked me how I use math to balance my video game designs. The answer is, I don't.

I use mathematics to implement my design ideas efficiently. Often a design idea is impossible to realize without a solid mathematical foundation. Other times knowing the right math can make it very simple. Hell sometimes I'll just solve some equations because it's fun. But then after the implementation is written, the math goes away and I begin to use a completely different set of tools. I will sometimes use a spreadsheet to guide the balance of major game features, but by and large I don't use mathematics to balance my games. Rather, I design by "sense of feel".

What does "sense of feel" mean? I don't know honestly, it's a term I made up that's tactile enough to describe my process. I felt the need to make up a term because that process doesn't really have another name.

The "sense of feel" process is:

1. Write some code.
2. Try the code I wrote.
3. Change the code.
4. Try to forget the restrictions imposed because of the way it's implemented and try the code again.
5. Change the code.
6. Have someone else try the code. Watch them fail to interact with it the way I intended. Think about whether I should teach them my intention or whether I should rewrite my code to match their expectations.
7. Change the code.
8. Have another person look at the code. The less familiar they are with what I'm trying to do, the better.
9. Change the code.
10. Think again about what I'm doing and why. Re-evaluate my design choices and consider whether or not they were successful. Realize the way I did it in the first place was awful. Have ideas to re-implement the entire thing a better way. Debate with myself whether that other way is any better. Debate with myself whether any of my ideas are any good at all. Have an existential crisis.
11. Run out of time and settle for a 20% effort solution that gets me 80% of the way there.
12. Move on to the next feature and go back to step 1.

It's not quite a process of trial and error. The trials are educated by years of design experience and intuition, and the errors aren't errors at all, they're steps on the path to a (more) solid design. If you wanted something more formal or rigorous, I'm sorry to disappoint you but it doesn't exist.

You can't math your way to a well-designed game. There are too many variables, and many of the variables are not quantifiable. There is no equation to express the balance of a nontrivial game. You have to feel it.

That said, there are some methods that are common and useful enough that I may do a video series about them at some point. It would cover things like juiciness, risk/reward mechanics, complexity budgets, the psychology of the eye and screen real estate, the role of goals and story in game design, tutorials and game mechanics pedagogy, etc etc, but none of it would involve any math, and a lot of it has already been covered in other places like Extra Credits. It would be a huge departure from my usual format. Even so, it's on my list of things to possibly cover in the future.