Title: Gamers, Gates, Puppies, and Internet Culture
Time: 1434438180

Gamergate is not an anomaly. It affects our industry exclusively, so maybe somewhere in the back of our minds we think that there must be something about gamers or video games that caused this shitstorm of destructive behavior. But let me tell you about Puppygate.

The Hugos are the science fiction and fantasy book genre's analogue to the IGF. They are the preeminent awards show for scifi and fantasy - every year all of the big scifi and fantasy authors get together and vote on who wrote the best scifi or fantasy books that year. This year, a group of conservative authors organized to load the ballots with other conservative writers, because they felt that conservative writers weren't being represented adequately in the Hugos. This group was called the Sad Puppies. The Internet shitstorm that ensued when the ballots came out dominated by authors on the Sad Puppy slate was called Puppygate.

The Puppies and the Anti-Puppies are divided mostly along political lines. There are large bands of Puppy advocates who harass the "social justice warriors" (a Puppy term for progressive writers) who they perceive as having buried the works of conservative authors. I'm sure there are also large bands of Anti-Puppies who likewise attack Puppies. There are death threats and blogging battles and hey, doesn't all of this sound vaguely familiar?

I think the two phenomena are very much related.

Both of these phenomena have a shared root cause: the Internet. That's a very broad claim so give me a paragraph or two to back it up.

The Internet today is very different from what it was ten years ago. There is a new machine of blogs, portals, and YouTube channels designed to provoke clicks and attract eyeballs by having the most provocative content. It's the eyeball machine. The most provocative emotion, the emotion that is most effective to use to get people to click on something, is anger. Looking at the front page of Yahoo right now I see stories like, "Parents Under Investigation After 11-Year-Old Plays Alone in Yard for 90 Minutes" and "'How I Dressed When I Was 14 vs. How 14-Year-Old Girls Dress Now'" and "The reactions to Donald Trump's _outrageous_ 2016 speech are absolutely golden". (I admit, I was incited to click on one of these. For research purposes, of course. I refuse to name which one.) This outrage machine, as it is also called, conditions people to be angry about things. The outrage machine teaches us that outrage is the solution to social problems. Don't like something that happened on the Internet? Get outraged!

But what happens with all of that outrage? It has to go somewhere. A single person can't fix the problem, but they can contribute by posting a nasty comment and harassing someone on Twitter. Now the world knows about the outrage. It may not solve the problem, but it at least makes the person feel better.

Nobody planned for it to work this way. Someone along the line needed to make a buck, and realized that making people angry is a good way to do that. Not any way I would like to make a living, but a lot of other people noticed and started doing the same thing. They didn't intend to condition people to be angry and cause a cultural shift, but here we are. Gamergate, Puppygate, and many more instances such as the puerile attacks from Anonymous are really an inevitable result of these new shifts in social values caused, at least in part, by Internet marketing.

I used to love the Internet. It was where I could learn anything I wanted to, communicate with anyone in the world instantly, and share the things I had created with other people. Sure, there were Internet flame wars in 1995, but they were about which was the best text editor or operating system or the occasional political debate, and death threats were not in the picture. Gamergate and Puppygate would never have happened then. Today the Internet is still a good place to share information, but the information superhighway now also serves as the infrastructure of a larger machine.

I'm not certain that the Internet's benefit to mankind is outweighed by the harm it has done to, for example, the careers of game developers and fantasy novel writers. Not to mention the damage to our attention spans, the depth of our understanding of knowledge, and the level at which we are willing to engage in media, not just as a society or a country, but as a race. Gamergate is not an anomaly, it's systemic, and it will continue to happen for as long as the eyeball machine remains.

I don't think that the inevitable conclusion is that the people who are being harassed in our industry should give up and put up with the shitstorm. (I hope that it ends soon, now would be good.) We need a tactic that can be effective against the monster at hand. Women speaking out about the things that they are forced to endure to make games can change for the better the cultures of the companies they work at, but the Gamergate shitstorm can't be stopped by spreading a message or talking about feelings. We need to change our channels of communication to prevent the outrage from reaching its victims. We need Twitter and the curators of comment sections to devote themselves to zero tolerance policies. The software industry as a whole needs to value the hard work of its creatives over the vitriolic voices of their detractors. We can't ignore the problem and it won't go away, so we need a way to prevent gamergaters and puppygaters from using the Internet's communication channels to harass thousands of hard working people who just love to make amazing things.